---
layout: post
title:  "Learn From Moving Fast"
date:   2013-08-14 11:00:00
categories: ['entrepreneurship']
---
<p>
This summer I had the inspiring opportunity to take part in the rapid metamorphosis of Wanderu, an early stage startup set out to become the Kayak.com of ground-travel. <a href="http://wanderu.com/" target="_blank">Wanderu</a> had been founded just over a year ago, and its mission is to aggregate bus and train schedule and pricing information in its travel search engine product.  It allows people to easily search, plan and purchase bus/train trips from point A to point B. When I started at the beginning of this summer, Wanderu already had nearly 20,000 beta users and had won accolades from SXSW, but had not yet readied its search engine for the public. Now, fast forward to today, and Wanderu has already launched and secured a round of <a href="http://techcrunch.com/2013/08/12/to-match-the-growing-number-of-ground-travelers-startup-wanderu-launches-a-kayak-for-bus-and-train-schedules/" target="_blank">funding</a>! How’s that for moving fast?
</p>
<p>
 This summer, Wanderu was based out of the Boston Paypal <a href="http://www.starttank.com/" target="_blank">StartTank</a>, an incubator coworking space sponsored by Ebay’s Paypal, which also claimed host to fifteen startups in total. You could call it a “fraternity” of startups, for lack of a better term. There is arguably no friendlier environment for startups in Boston, save the Harvard I-lab.
</p>
</p>
 My role at Wanderu was primarily in the realm of software engineering and internet application architecture. As a member of the engineering team of eight, our goal for the summer was to keep developing new features and rollout these improvements to the beta users, as well as design solutions to allow our search engine to withstand the heavy traffic of future public use. My work required foresight about the future needs of the startup, and ultimately my favorite project was architecting and prototyping a data caching solution to make the search engine more efficient, tackling future concerns about the product’s scalability in the process.
</p>
 From a strictly technical perspective, engineering work for early-stage web startups comes with its special…perks, where improving and overhauling code messes originally intended as one-time prototypes is a rite of passage for any early-stage engineering team. Despite the prevalence of nascent spaghetti code, at every point in a (successful) startup’s life cycle, the original code either has to be made more maintainable or replaced completely. It was because Wanderu was emerging from this prototype stage that really made my experience there so empowering. Being immersed in the team as first an outsider, I was able to provide a fresh perspective on the existing product and I was encouraged to suggest fixes to any problems that stuck out at me. For instance, I was able to create a more robust, dynamic approach to testing the backend codebase of the search engine that improved on the previous implementation. In all, I got to provide valuable input for improving the architecture of the application and its features all across the board. Divvying up and taking charge of responsibilities like these is characteristic of the “agile approach” to team software development, and it was what ultimately allowed us to focus our collective efforts on creating a better user experience for our product’s end user.
<p>
 In general, working for an early-stage startup involves taking on a wide range of responsibilities. Early in the life of every great startup, your coworkers embody the founding ideals and culture of the startup, and your work environment becomes a family of sorts. Through sharing this experience with your colleagues in this atmosphere, you really get a great perspective on the collective effort needed to make a startup fly, as well as the process of bringing a promising idea to fruition. There is often way more on your plate than your team can accomplish during any given week, and the company is small enough that it is really each team member’s responsibility to structure their own workflow. Having worked for other early stage startups, my experience has taught me that getting used to this type of environment does take some time, and it helps if you are used to being independent and a generalist problem solver. However, as long as you are open-minded, driven, and can thrive when working with others, there is endless potential for personal growth, honing your skills, and making a difference for your product’s users. So for aspiring student entrepreneurs interested in the web startup space, I strongly recommend working for a few startups first! You may be surprised at how much you learn by doing so, and it will help anchor your future pursuits with stronger skills and keener entrepreneurial insight.
</p>
<br />
<p>
 <i>A version of this article was also <a href="http://harvardventures.org/2013/08/14/wilsons-summer-internship-learn-from-moving-fast/">cross published in the Harvard College Venture Partners Blog</a>.</i>
</p>